<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXIV: The Mysterious Death in Percy Street</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-34" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Mysterious Death in Percy Street</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Miss Polly Burton had had many an argument with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Richard Frobisher about that old man in the corner, who seemed far more interesting and deucedly more mysterious than any of the crimes over which he philosophised.</p>
			<p>Dick thought, moreover, that Miss Polly spent more of her leisure time now in that A.B.C. shop than she had done in his own company before, and told her so, with that delightful air of sheepish sulkiness which the male creature invariably wears when he feels jealous and won’t admit it.</p>
			<p>Polly liked Dick to be jealous, but she liked that old scarecrow in the A.B.C. shop very much too, and though she made sundry vague promises from time to time to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Richard Frobisher, she nevertheless drifted back instinctively day after day to the tea-shop in Norfolk Street, Strand, and stayed there sipping coffee for as long as the man in the corner chose to talk.</p>
			<p>On this particular afternoon she went to the A.B.C. shop with a fixed purpose, that of making him give her his views of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Owen’s mysterious death in Percy Street.</p>
			<p>The facts had interested and puzzled her. She had had countless arguments with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Richard Frobisher as to the three great possible solutions of the puzzle⁠—“Accident, Suicide, Murder?”</p>
			<p>“Undoubtedly neither accident nor suicide,” he said dryly.</p>
			<p>Polly was not aware that she had spoken. What an uncanny habit that creature had of reading her thoughts!</p>
			<p>“You incline to the idea, then, that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Owen was murdered. Do you know by whom?”</p>
			<p>He laughed, and drew forth the piece of string he always fidgeted with when unravelling some mystery.</p>
			<p>“You would like to know who murdered that old woman?” he asked at last.</p>
			<p>“I would like to hear your views on the subject,” Polly replied.</p>
			<p>“I have no views,” he said dryly. “No one can know who murdered the woman, since no one ever saw the person who did it. No one can give the faintest description of the mysterious man who alone could have committed that clever deed, and the police are playing a game of blind man’s buff.”</p>
			<p>“But you must have formed some theory of your own,” she persisted.</p>
			<p>It annoyed her that the funny creature was obstinate about this point, and she tried to nettle his vanity.</p>
			<p>“I suppose that as a matter of fact your original remark that ‘there are no such things as mysteries’ does not apply universally. There is a mystery⁠—that of the death in Percy Street, and you, like the police, are unable to fathom it.”</p>
			<p>He pulled up his eyebrows and looked at her for a minute or two.</p>
			<p>“Confess that that murder was one of the cleverest bits of work accomplished outside Russian diplomacy,” he said with a nervous laugh. “I must say that were I the judge, called upon to pronounce sentence of death on the man who conceived that murder, I could not bring myself to do it. I would politely request the gentleman to enter our Foreign Office⁠—we have need of such men. The whole <i>mise en scène</i> was truly artistic, worthy of its <i>milieu</i>⁠—the Rubens Studios in Percy Street, Tottenham Court Road.</p>
			<p>“Have you ever noticed them? They are only studios by name, and are merely a set of rooms in a corner house, with the windows slightly enlarged, and the rents charged accordingly in consideration of that additional five inches of smoky daylight, filtering through dusty windows. On the ground floor there is the order office of some stained glass works, with a workshop in the rear, and on the first floor landing a small room allotted to the caretaker, with gas, coal, and fifteen shillings a week, for which princely income she is deputed to keep tidy and clean the general aspect of the house.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Owen, who was the caretaker there, was a quiet, respectable woman, who eked out her scanty wages by sundry⁠—mostly very meagre⁠—tips doled out to her by impecunious artists in exchange for promiscuous domestic services in and about the respective studios.</p>
			<p>“But if <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Owen’s earnings were not large, they were very regular, and she had no fastidious tastes. She and her cockatoo lived on her wages; and all the tips added up, and never spent, year after year, went to swell a very comfortable little account at interest in the Birkbeck Bank. This little account had mounted up to a very tidy sum, and the thrifty widow⁠—or old maid⁠—no one ever knew which she was⁠—was generally referred to by the young artists of the Rubens Studios as a ‘lady of means.’ But this is a digression.</p>
			<p>“No one slept on the premises except <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Owen and her cockatoo. The rule was that one by one as the tenants left their rooms in the evening they took their respective keys to the caretaker’s room. She would then, in the early morning, tidy and dust the studios and the office downstairs, lay the fire and carry up coals.</p>
			<p>“The foreman of the glass works was the first to arrive in the morning. He had a latch-key, and let himself in, after which it was the custom of the house that he should leave the street door open for the benefit of the other tenants and their visitors.</p>
			<p>“Usually, when he came at about nine o’clock, he found <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Owen busy about the house doing her work, and he had often a brief chat with her about the weather, but on this particular morning of February 2nd he neither saw nor heard her. However, as the shop had been tidied and the fire laid, he surmised that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Owen had finished her work earlier than usual, and thought no more about it. One by one the tenants of the studios turned up, and the day sped on without any one’s attention being drawn noticeably to the fact that the caretaker had not appeared upon the scene.</p>
			<p>“It had been a bitterly cold night, and the day was even worse; a cutting north-easterly gale was blowing, there had been a great deal of snow during the night which lay quite thick on the ground, and at five o’clock in the afternoon, when the last glimmer of the pale winter daylight had disappeared, the confraternity of the brush put palette and easel aside and prepared to go home. The first to leave was <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Charles Pitt; he locked up his studio and, as usual, took his key into the caretaker’s room.</p>
			<p>“He had just opened the door when an icy blast literally struck him in the face; both the windows were wide open, and the snow and sleet were beating thickly into the room, forming already a white carpet upon the floor.</p>
			<p>“The room was in semi-obscurity, and at first <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pitt saw nothing, but instinctively realizing that something was wrong, he lit a match, and saw before him the spectacle of that awful and mysterious tragedy which has ever since puzzled both police and public. On the floor, already half covered by the drifting snow, lay the body of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Owen face downwards, in a nightgown, with feet and ankles bare, and these and her hands were of a deep purple colour; whilst in a corner of the room, huddled up with the cold, the body of the cockatoo lay stark and stiff.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
