<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXII: Forgery</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-22" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Forgery</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>“The facts that transpired in connection with this extraordinary case were sufficiently mysterious to puzzle everybody. As I told you before, all <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brooks’ friends never quite grasped the idea that the old man should so completely have cut off his favourite son with the proverbial shilling.</p>
			<p>“You see, Percival had always been a thorn in the old man’s flesh. Horse-racing, gambling, theatres, and music-halls were, in the old pork-butcher’s eyes, so many deadly sins which his son committed every day of his life, and all the Fitzwilliam Place household could testify to the many and bitter quarrels which had arisen between father and son over the latter’s gambling or racing debts. Many people asserted that Brooks would sooner have left his money to charitable institutions than seen it squandered upon the brightest stars that adorned the music-hall stage.</p>
			<p>“The case came up for hearing early in the autumn. In the meanwhile Percival Brooks had given up his racecourse associates, settled down in the Fitzwilliam Place mansion, and conducted his father’s business, without a manager, but with all the energy and forethought which he had previously devoted to more unworthy causes.</p>
			<p>“Murray had elected not to stay on in the old house; no doubt associations were of too painful and recent a nature; he was boarding with the family of a <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wilson Hibbert, who was the late Patrick Wethered’s, the murdered lawyer’s, partner. They were quiet, homely people, who lived in a very pokey little house in Kilkenny Street, and poor Murray must, in spite of his grief, have felt very bitterly the change from his luxurious quarters in his father’s mansion to his present tiny room and homely meals.</p>
			<p>“Percival Brooks, who was now drawing an income of over a hundred thousand a year, was very severely criticised for adhering so strictly to the letter of his father’s will, and only paying his brother that paltry £300 a year, which was very literally but the crumbs off his own magnificent dinner table.</p>
			<p>“The issue of that contested will case was therefore awaited with eager interest. In the meanwhile the police, who had at first seemed fairly loquacious on the subject of the murder of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Patrick Wethered, suddenly became strangely reticent, and by their very reticence aroused a certain amount of uneasiness in the public mind, until one day the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Irish Times</i> published the following extraordinary, enigmatic paragraph:</p>
			<p>“ ‘We hear on authority which cannot be questioned, that certain extraordinary developments are expected in connection with the brutal murder of our distinguished townsman <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wethered; the police, in fact, are vainly trying to keep it secret that they hold a clue which is as important as it is sensational, and that they only await the impending issue of a well-known litigation in the probate court to effect an arrest.’</p>
			<p>“The Dublin public flocked to the court to hear the arguments in the great will case. I myself journeyed down to Dublin. As soon as I succeeded in fighting my way to the densely crowded court, I took stock of the various actors in the drama, which I as a spectator was prepared to enjoy. There were Percival Brooks and Murray his brother, the two litigants, both good-looking and well dressed, and both striving, by keeping up a running conversation with their lawyer, to appear unconcerned and confident of the issue. With Percival Brooks was Henry Oranmore, the eminent Irish K.C., whilst Walter Hibbert, a rising young barrister, the son of Wilson Hibbert, appeared for Murray.</p>
			<p>“The will of which the latter claimed probate was one dated 1891, and had been made by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brooks during a severe illness which threatened to end his days. This will had been deposited in the hands of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Messrs.</abbr> Wethered and Hibbert, solicitors to the deceased, and by it <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brooks left his personalty equally divided between his two sons, but had left his business entirely to his youngest son, with a charge of £2,000 a year upon it, payable to Percival. You see that Murray Brooks therefore had a very deep interest in that second will being found null and void.</p>
			<p>“Old <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Hibbert had very ably instructed his son, and Walter Hibbert’s opening speech was exceedingly clever. He would show, he said, on behalf of his client, that the will dated February 1st, 1908, could never have been made by the late <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brooks, as it was absolutely contrary to his avowed intentions, and that if the late <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brooks did on the day in question make any fresh will at all, it certainly was <em>not</em> the one proved by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Percival Brooks, for that was absolutely a forgery from beginning to end. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Walter Hibbert proposed to call several witnesses in support of both these points.</p>
			<p>“On the other hand, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Henry Oranmore, K.C., very ably and courteously replied that he too had several witnesses to prove that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brooks certainly did make a will on the day in question, and that, whatever his intentions may have been in the past, he must have modified them on the day of his death, for the will proved by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Percival Brooks was found after his death under his pillow, duly signed and witnessed and in every way legal.</p>
			<p>“Then the battle began in sober earnest. There were a great many witnesses to be called on both sides, their evidence being of more or less importance⁠—chiefly less. But the interest centred round the prosaic figure of John O’Neill, the butler at Fitzwilliam Place, who had been in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brooks’ family for thirty years.</p>
			<p>“ ‘I was clearing away my breakfast things,’ said John, ‘when I heard the master’s voice in the study close by. Oh my, he was that angry! I could hear the words “disgrace,” and “villain,” and “liar,” and “ballet-dancer,” and one or two other ugly words as applied to some female lady, which I would not like to repeat. At first I did not take much notice, as I was quite used to hearing my poor dear master having words with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Percival. So I went downstairs carrying my breakfast things; but I had just started cleaning my silver when the study bell goes ringing violently, and I hear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Percival’s voice shouting in the hall: “John! quick! Send for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Mulligan at once. Your master is not well! Send one of the men, and you come up and help me to get <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brooks to bed.”</p>
			<p>“ ‘I sent one of the grooms for the doctor,’ continued John, who seemed still affected at the recollection of his poor master, to whom he had evidently been very much attached, ‘and I went up to see <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brooks. I found him lying on the study floor, his head supported in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Percival’s arms. “My father has fallen in a faint,” said the young master; “help me to get him up to his room before <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Mulligan comes.”</p>
			<p>“ ‘<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Percival looked very white and upset, which was only natural; and when we had got my poor master to bed, I asked if I should not go and break the news to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Murray, who had gone to business an hour ago. However, before <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Percival had time to give me an order the doctor came. I thought I had seen death plainly writ in my master’s face, and when I showed the doctor out an hour later, and he told me that he would be back directly, I knew that the end was near.</p>
			<p>“ ‘<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brooks rang for me a minute or two later. He told me to send at once for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wethered, or else for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Hibbert, if <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wethered could not come. “I haven’t many hours to live, John,” he says to me⁠—“my heart is broke, the doctor says my heart is broke. A man shouldn’t marry and have children, John, for they will sooner or later break his heart.” I was so upset I couldn’t speak; but I sent round at once for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wethered, who came himself just about three o’clock that afternoon.</p>
			<p>“ ‘After he had been with my master about an hour I was called in, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wethered said to me that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brooks wished me and one other of us servants to witness that he had signed a paper which was on a table by his bedside. I called Pat Mooney, the head footman, and before us both <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brooks put his name at the bottom of that paper. Then <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wethered give me the pen and told me to write my name as a witness, and that Pat Mooney was to do the same. After that we were both told that we could go.’</p>
			<p>“The old butler went on to explain that he was present in his late master’s room on the following day when the undertakers, who had come to lay the dead man out, found a paper underneath his pillow. John O’Neill, who recognized the paper as the one to which he had appended his signature the day before, took it to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Percival, and gave it into his hands.</p>
			<p>“In answer to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Walter Hibbert, John asserted positively that he took the paper from the undertaker’s hand and went straight with it to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Percival’s room.</p>
			<p>“ ‘He was alone,’ said John; ‘I gave him the paper. He just glanced at it, and I thought he looked rather astonished, but he said nothing, and I at once left the room.’</p>
			<p>“ ‘When you say that you recognized the paper as the one which you had seen your master sign the day before, how did you actually recognize that it was the same paper?’ asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Hibbert amidst breathless interest on the part of the spectators. I narrowly observed the witness’s face.</p>
			<p>“ ‘It looked exactly the same paper to me, sir,’ replied John, somewhat vaguely.</p>
			<p>“ ‘Did you look at the contents, then?’</p>
			<p>“ ‘No, sir; certainly not.’</p>
			<p>“ ‘Had you done so the day before?’</p>
			<p>“ ‘No, sir, only at my master’s signature.’</p>
			<p>“ ‘Then you only thought by the <em>outside</em> look of the paper that it was the same?’</p>
			<p>“ ‘It looked the same thing, sir,’ persisted John obstinately.</p>
			<p>“You see,” continued the man in the corner, leaning eagerly forward across the narrow marble table, “the contention of Murray Brooks’ adviser was that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brooks, having made a will and hidden it⁠—for some reason or other under his pillow⁠—that will had fallen, through the means related by John O’Neill, into the hands of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Percival Brooks, who had destroyed it and substituted a forged one in its place, which adjudged the whole of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brooks’ millions to himself. It was a terrible and very daring accusation directed against a gentleman who, in spite of his many wild oats sowed in early youth, was a prominent and important figure in Irish high life.</p>
			<p>“All those present were aghast at what they heard, and the whispered comments I could hear around me showed me that public opinion, at least, did not uphold <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Murray Brooks’ daring accusation against his brother.</p>
			<p>“But John O’Neill had not finished his evidence, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Walter Hibbert had a bit of sensation still up his sleeve. He had, namely, produced a paper, the will proved by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Percival Brooks, and had asked John O’Neill if once again he recognized the paper.</p>
			<p>“ ‘Certainly, sir,’ said John unhesitatingly, ‘that is the one the undertaker found under my poor dead master’s pillow, and which I took to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Percival’s room immediately.’</p>
			<p>“Then the paper was unfolded and placed before the witness.</p>
			<p>“ ‘Now, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> O’Neill, will you tell me if that is your signature?’</p>
			<p>“John looked at it for a moment; then he said: ‘Excuse me, sir,’ and produced a pair of spectacles which he carefully adjusted before he again examined the paper. Then he thoughtfully shook his head.</p>
			<p>“ ‘It don’t look much like my writing, sir,’ he said at last. ‘That is to say,’ he added, by way of elucidating the matter, ‘it does look like my writing, but then I don’t think it is.’</p>
			<p>“There was at that moment a look in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Percival Brooks’ face,” continued the man in the corner quietly, “which then and there gave me the whole history of that quarrel, that illness of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brooks, of the will, aye! and of the murder of Patrick Wethered too.</p>
			<p>“All I wondered at was how every one of those learned counsel on both sides did not get the clue just the same as I did, but went on arguing, speechifying, cross-examining for nearly a week, until they arrived at the one conclusion which was inevitable from the very first, namely, that the will <em>was</em> a forgery⁠—a gross, clumsy, idiotic forgery, since both John O’Neill and Pat Mooney, the two witnesses, absolutely repudiated the signatures as their own. The only successful bit of caligraphy the forger had done was the signature of old <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brooks.</p>
			<p>“It was a very curious fact, and one which had undoubtedly aided the forger in accomplishing his work quickly, that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wethered the lawyer having, no doubt, realized that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brooks had not many moments in life to spare, had not drawn up the usual engrossed, magnificent document dear to the lawyer heart, but had used for his client’s will one of those regular printed forms which can be purchased at any stationer’s.</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Percival Brooks, of course, flatly denied the serious allegation brought against him. He admitted that the butler had brought him the document the morning after his father’s death, and that he certainly, on glancing at it, had been very much astonished to see that that document was his father’s will. Against that he declared that its contents did not astonish him in the slightest degree, that he himself knew of the testator’s intentions, but that he certainly thought his father had entrusted the will to the care of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wethered, who did all his business for him.</p>
			<p>“ ‘I only very cursorily glanced at the signature,’ he concluded, speaking in a perfectly calm, clear voice; ‘you must understand that the thought of forgery was very far from my mind, and that my father’s signature is exceedingly well imitated, if, indeed, it is not his own, which I am not at all prepared to believe. As for the two witnesses’ signatures, I don’t think I had ever seen them before. I took the document to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Messrs.</abbr> Barkston and Maud, who had often done business for me before, and they assured me that the will was in perfect form and order.’</p>
			<p>“Asked why he had not entrusted the will to his father’s solicitors, he replied:</p>
			<p>“ ‘For the very simple reason that exactly half an hour before the will was placed in my hands, I had read that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Patrick Wethered had been murdered the night before. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Hibbert, the junior partner, was not personally known to me.’</p>
			<p>“After that, for form’s sake, a good deal of expert evidence was heard on the subject of the dead man’s signature. But that was quite unanimous, and merely went to corroborate what had already been established beyond a doubt, namely, that the will dated February 1st, 1908, was a forgery, and probate of the will dated 1891 was therefore granted to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Murray Brooks, the sole executor mentioned therein.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
