<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXIII: The Living and the Dead</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-33" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">The Living and the Dead</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>The man in the corner blinked across at Polly with his funny mild blue eyes.</p>
			<p>“No wonder you are puzzled,” he continued, “so was everybody in the court that day, everyone save myself. I alone could see in my mind’s eye that gruesome murder such as it had been committed, with all its details, and, above all, its motive, and such as you will see it presently, when I place it all clearly before you.</p>
			<p>“But before you see daylight in this strange case, I must plunge you into further darkness, in the same manner as the coroner and jury were plunged on the following day, the second day of that remarkable inquest. It had to be adjourned, since the appearance of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Timothy Beddingfield had now become of vital importance. The public had come to regard his absence from Birmingham at this critical moment as decidedly remarkable, to say the least of it, and all those who did not know the lawyer by sight wished to see him in his Inverness cape and Glengarry cap such as he had appeared before the several witnesses on the night of the awful murder.</p>
			<p>“When the coroner and jury were seated, the first piece of information which the police placed before them was the astounding statement that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Timothy Beddingfield’s whereabouts had not been ascertained, though it was confidently expected that he had not gone far and could easily be traced. There was a witness present who, the police thought, might throw some light as to the lawyer’s probable destination, for obviously he had left Birmingham directly after his interview with the deceased.</p>
			<p>“This witness was <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Higgins, who was <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Beddingfield’s housekeeper. She stated that her master was in the constant habit⁠—especially latterly⁠—of going up to London on business. He usually left by a late evening train on those occasions, and mostly was only absent thirty-six hours. He kept a portmanteau always ready packed for the purpose, for he often left at a few moments’ notice. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Higgins added that her master stayed at the Great Western Hotel in London, for it was there that she was instructed to wire if anything urgent required his presence back in Birmingham.</p>
			<p>“ ‘On the night of the 14th,’ she continued, ‘at nine o’clock or thereabouts, a messenger came to the door with the master’s card, and said that he was instructed to fetch <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Beddingfield’s portmanteau, and then to meet him at the station in time to catch the 9:35 <abbr>p.m.</abbr> up train. I gave him the portmanteau, of course, as he had brought the card, and I had no idea there could be anything wrong; but since then I have heard nothing of my master, and I don’t know when he will return.’</p>
			<p>“Questioned by the coroner, she added that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Beddingfield had never stayed away quite so long without having his letters forwarded to him. There was a large pile waiting for him now; she had written to the Great Western Hotel, London, asking what she should do about the letters, but had received no reply. She did not know the messenger by sight who had called for the portmanteau. Once or twice before <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Beddingfield had sent for his things in that manner when he had been dining out.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Beddingfield certainly wore his Inverness cape over his dress clothes when he went out at about six o’clock in the afternoon. He also wore a Glengarry cap.</p>
			<p>“The messenger had so far not yet been found, and from this point⁠—namely, the sending for the portmanteau⁠—all traces of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Timothy Beddingfield seem to have been lost. Whether he went up to London by that 9:35 train or not could not be definitely ascertained. The police had questioned at least a dozen porters at the railway, as well as ticket collectors; but no one had any special recollection of a gentleman in an Inverness cape and Glengarry cap, a costume worn by more than one first-class passenger on a cold night in September.</p>
			<p>“There was the hitch, you see; it all lay in this. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Timothy Beddingfield, the lawyer, had undoubtedly made himself scarce. He was last seen in company with the deceased, and wearing an Inverness cape and Glengarry cap; two or three witnesses saw him leaving the hotel at about 9:15. Then the messenger calls at the lawyer’s house for the portmanteau, after which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Timothy Beddingfield seems to vanish into thin air; but⁠—and that is a great ‘but’⁠—the night porter at the Castle seems to have seen someone wearing the momentous Inverness and Glengarry half an hour or so later on, and going up to deceased’s room, where he stayed about a quarter of an hour.</p>
			<p>“Undoubtedly you will say, as everyone said to themselves that day after the night porter and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Higgins had been heard, that there was a very ugly and very black finger which pointed unpleasantly at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Timothy Beddingfield, especially as that gentleman, for some reason which still required an explanation, was not there to put matters right for himself. But there was just one little thing⁠—a mere trifle, perhaps⁠—which neither the coroner nor the jury dared to overlook, though, strictly speaking, it was not evidence.</p>
			<p>“You will remember that when the night porter was asked if he could, among the persons present in court, recognize the <abbr>Hon.</abbr> Robert de Genneville’s belated visitor, everyone had noticed his hesitation, and marked that the man’s eyes had rested doubtingly upon the face and figure of the young Earl of Brockelsby.</p>
			<p>“Now, if that belated visitor had been <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Timothy Beddingfield⁠—tall, lean, dry as dust, with a birdlike beak and clean-shaven chin⁠—no one could for a moment have mistaken his face⁠—even if they only saw it very casually and recollected it but very dimly⁠—with that of young Lord Brockelsby, who was florid and rather short⁠—the only point in common between them was their Saxon hair.</p>
			<p>“You see that it was a curious point, don’t you?” added the man in the corner, who now had become so excited that his fingers worked like long thin tentacles round and round his bit of string. “It weighed very heavily in favour of Timothy Beddingfield. Added to which you must also remember that, as far as he was concerned, the <abbr>Hon.</abbr> Robert de Genneville was to him the goose with the golden eggs.</p>
			<p>“The ‘De Genneville peerage case’ had brought Beddingfield’s name in great prominence. With the death of the claimant all hopes of prolonging the litigation came to an end. There was a total lack of motive as far as Beddingfield was concerned.”</p>
			<p>“Not so with the Earl of Brockelsby,” said Polly, “and I’ve often maintained⁠—”</p>
			<p>“What?” he interrupted. “That the Earl of Brockelsby changed clothes with Beddingfield in order more conveniently to murder his own brother? Where and when could the exchange of costume have been effected, considering that the Inverness cape and Glengarry cap were in the hall of the Castle Hotel at 9:15, and at that hour and until ten o’clock Lord Brockelsby was at the Grand Hotel finishing dinner with some friends? That was subsequently proved, remember, and also that he was back at Brockelsby Castle, which is seven miles from Birmingham, at eleven o’clock sharp. Now, the visit of the individual in the Glengarry occurred some time after 10 <abbr class="eoc">p.m.</abbr>”</p>
			<p>“Then there was the disappearance of Beddingfield,” said the girl musingly. “That certainly points very strongly to him. He was a man in good practice, I believe, and fairly well known.”</p>
			<p>“And has never been heard of from that day to this,” concluded the old scarecrow with a chuckle. “No wonder you are puzzled. The police were quite baffled, and still are, for a matter of that. And yet see how simple it is! Only the police would not look further than these two men⁠—Lord Brockelsby with a strong motive and the night porter’s hesitation against him, and Beddingfield without a motive, but with strong circumstantial evidence and his own disappearance as condemnatory signs.</p>
			<p>“If only they would look at the case as I did, and think a little about the dead as well as about the living. If they had remembered that peerage case, the <abbr>Hon.</abbr> Robert’s debts, his last straw which proved a futile claim.</p>
			<p>“Only that very day the Earl of Brockelsby had, by quietly showing the original ancient document to his brother, persuaded him how futile were all his hopes. Who knows how many were the debts contracted, the promises made, the money borrowed and obtained on the strength of that claim which was mere romance? Ahead nothing but ruin, enmity with his brother, his marriage probably broken off, a wasted life, in fact.</p>
			<p>“Is it small wonder that, though ill-feeling against the Earl of Brockelsby may have been deep, there was hatred, bitter, deadly hatred against the man who with false promises had led him into so hopeless a quagmire? Probably the <abbr>Hon.</abbr> Robert owed a great deal of money to Beddingfield, which the latter hoped to recoup at usurious interest, with threats of scandal and whatnot.</p>
			<p>“Think of all that,” he added, “and then tell me if you believe that a stronger motive for the murder of such an enemy could well be found.”</p>
			<p>“But what you suggest is impossible,” said Polly, aghast.</p>
			<p>“Allow me,” he said, “it is more than possible⁠—it is very easy and simple. The two men were alone together in the <abbr>Hon.</abbr> Robert de Genneville’s room after dinner. You, as representing the public, and the police say that Beddingfield went away and returned half an hour later in order to kill his client. I say that it was the lawyer who was murdered at nine o’clock that evening, and that Robert de Genneville, the ruined man, the hopeless bankrupt, was the assassin.”</p>
			<p>“Then⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Yes, of course, now you remember, for I have put you on the track. The face and the body were so battered and bruised that they were past recognition. Both men were of equal height. The hair, which alone could not be disfigured or obliterated, was in both men similar in colour.</p>
			<p>“Then the murderer proceeds to dress his victim in his own clothes. With the utmost care he places his own rings on the fingers of the dead man, his own watch in the pocket; a gruesome task, but an important one, and it is thoroughly well done. Then he himself puts on the clothes of his victim, with finally the Inverness cape and Glengarry, and when the hall is full of visitors he slips out unperceived. He sends the messenger for Beddingfield’s portmanteau and starts off by the night express.”</p>
			<p>“But then his visit at the Castle Hotel at ten o’clock⁠—” she urged. “How dangerous!”</p>
			<p>“Dangerous? Yes! but oh, how clever. You see, he was the Earl of Brockelsby’s twin brother, and twin brothers are always somewhat alike. He wished to appear dead, murdered by someone, he cared not whom, but what he did care about was to throw clouds of dust in the eyes of the police, and he succeeded with a vengeance. Perhaps⁠—who knows?⁠—he wished to assure himself that he had forgotten nothing in the <i xml:lang="fr">mise-en-scène</i>, that the body, battered and bruised past all semblance of any human shape save for its clothes, really would appear to everyone as that of the <abbr>Hon.</abbr> Robert de Genneville, while the latter disappeared forever from the old world and started life again in the new.</p>
			<p>“Then you must always reckon with the practically invariable rule that a murderer always revisits, if only once, the scene of his crime.</p>
			<p>“Two years have elapsed since the crime; no trace of Timothy Beddingfield, the lawyer, has ever been found, and I can assure you that it will never be, for his plebeian body lies buried in the aristocratic family vault of the Earl of Brockelsby.”</p>
			<p>He was gone before Polly could say another word. The faces of Timothy Beddingfield, of the Earl of Brockelsby, of the <abbr>Hon.</abbr> Robert de Genneville seemed to dance before her eyes and to mock her for the hopeless bewilderment in which she found herself plunged because of them; then all the faces vanished, or, rather, were merged in one long, thin, birdlike one, with bone-rimmed spectacles on the top of its beak, and a wide, rude grin beneath it, and, still puzzled, still doubtful, the young girl too paid for her scanty luncheon and went her way.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
