<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VII: The York Mystery</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">The York Mystery</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>The man in the corner looked quite cheerful that morning; he had had two glasses of milk and had even gone to the extravagance of an extra cheesecake. Polly knew that he was itching to talk police and murders, for he cast furtive glances at her from time to time, produced a bit of string, tied and untied it into scores of complicated knots, and finally, bringing out his pocketbook, he placed two or three photographs before her.</p>
			<p>“Do you know who that is?” he asked, pointing to one of these.</p>
			<p>The girl looked at the face on the picture. It was that of a woman, not exactly pretty, but very gentle and childlike, with a strange pathetic look in the large eyes which was wonderfully appealing.</p>
			<p>“That was Lady Arthur Skelmerton,” he said, and in a flash there flitted before Polly’s mind the weird and tragic history which had broken this loving woman’s heart. Lady Arthur Skelmerton! That name recalled one of the most bewildering, most mysterious passages in the annals of undiscovered crimes.</p>
			<p>“Yes. It was sad, wasn’t it?” he commented, in answer to Polly’s thoughts. “Another case which but for idiotic blunders on the part of the police must have stood clear as daylight before the public and satisfied general anxiety. Would you object to my recapitulating its preliminary details?”</p>
			<p>She said nothing, so he continued without waiting further for a reply.</p>
			<p>“It all occurred during the York racing week, a time which brings to the quiet cathedral city its quota of shady characters, who congregate wherever money and wits happen to fly away from their owners. Lord Arthur Skelmerton, a very well-known figure in London society and in racing circles, had rented one of the fine houses which overlook the racecourse. He had entered Peppercorn, by <abbr>St.</abbr> Armand⁠—Notre Dame, for the Great Ebor Handicap. Peppercorn was the winner of the Newmarket, and his chances for the Ebor were considered a practical certainty.</p>
			<p>“If you have ever been to York you will have noticed the fine houses which have their drive and front entrances in the road called ‘The Mount.’ and the gardens of which extend as far as the racecourse, commanding a lovely view over the entire track. It was one of these houses, called ‘The Elms,’ which Lord Arthur Skelmerton had rented for the summer.</p>
			<p>“Lady Arthur came down some little time before the racing week with her servants⁠—she had no children; but she had many relatives and friends in York, since she was the daughter of old Sir John Etty, the cocoa manufacturer, a rigid Quaker, who, it was generally said, kept the tightest possible hold on his own purse-strings and looked with marked disfavour upon his aristocratic son-in-law’s fondness for gaming tables and betting books.</p>
			<p>“As a matter of fact, Maud Etty had married the handsome young lieutenant in the Hussars, quite against her father’s wishes. But she was an only child, and after a good deal of demur and grumbling, Sir John, who idolized his daughter, gave way to her whim, and a reluctant consent to the marriage was wrung from him.</p>
			<p>“But, as a Yorkshireman, he was far too shrewd a man of the world not to know that love played but a very small part in persuading a Duke’s son to marry the daughter of a cocoa manufacturer, and as long as he lived he determined that since his daughter was being wed because of her wealth, that wealth should at least secure her own happiness. He refused to give Lady Arthur any capital, which, in spite of the most carefully worded settlements, would inevitably, sooner or later, have found its way into the pockets of Lord Arthur’s racing friends. But he made his daughter a very handsome allowance, amounting to over £3,000 a year, which enabled her to keep up an establishment befitting her new rank.</p>
			<p>“A great many of these facts, intimate enough as they are, leaked out, you see, during that period of intense excitement which followed the murder of Charles Lavender, and when the public eye was fixed searchingly upon Lord Arthur Skelmerton, probing all the inner details of his idle, useless life.</p>
			<p>“It soon became a matter of common gossip that poor little Lady Arthur continued to worship her handsome husband in spite of his obvious neglect, and not having as yet presented him with an heir, she settled herself down into a life of humble apology for her plebeian existence, atoning for it by condoning all his faults and forgiving all his vices, even to the extent of cloaking them before the prying eyes of Sir John, who was persuaded to look upon his son-in-law as a paragon of all the domestic virtues and a perfect model of a husband.</p>
			<p>“Among Lord Arthur Skelmerton’s many expensive tastes there was certainly that for horseflesh and cards. After some successful betting at the beginning of his married life, he had started a racing-stable which it was generally believed⁠—as he was very lucky⁠—was a regular source of income to him.</p>
			<p>“Peppercorn, however, after his brilliant performances at Newmarket did not continue to fulfil his master’s expectations. His collapse at York was attributed to the hardness of the course and to various other causes, but its immediate effect was to put Lord Arthur Skelmerton in what is popularly called a tight place, for he had backed his horse for all he was worth, and must have stood to lose considerably over £5,000 on that one day.</p>
			<p>“The collapse of the favourite and the grand victory of King Cole, a rank outsider, on the other hand, had proved a golden harvest for the bookmakers, and all the York hotels were busy with dinners and suppers given by the confraternity of the Turf to celebrate the happy occasion. The next day was Friday, one of few important racing events, after which the brilliant and the shady throng which had flocked into the venerable city for the week would fly to more congenial climes, and leave it, with its fine old Minster and its ancient walls, as sleepy, as quiet as before.</p>
			<p>“Lord Arthur Skelmerton also intended to leave York on the Saturday, and on the Friday night he gave a farewell bachelor dinner party at The Elms, at which Lady Arthur did not appear. After dinner the gentlemen settled down to bridge, with pretty stiff points, you may be sure. It had just struck eleven at the Minster Tower, when constables McNaught and Murphy, who were patrolling the racecourse, were startled by loud cries of ‘murder’ and ‘police.’</p>
			<p>“Quickly ascertaining whence these cries proceeded, they hurried on at a gallop, and came up⁠—quite close to the boundary of Lord Arthur Skelmerton’s grounds⁠—upon a group of three men, two of whom seemed to be wrestling vigorously with one another, whilst the third was lying face downwards on the ground. As soon as the constables drew near, one of the wrestlers shouted more vigorously, and with a certain tone of authority:</p>
			<p>“ ‘Here, you fellows, hurry up, sharp; the brute is giving me the slip!’</p>
			<p>“But the brute did not seem inclined to do anything of the sort; he certainly extricated himself with a violent jerk from his assailant’s grasp, but made no attempt to run away. The constables had quickly dismounted, whilst he who had shouted for help originally added more quietly:</p>
			<p>“ ‘My name is Skelmerton. This is the boundary of my property. I was smoking a cigar at the pavilion over there with a friend when I heard loud voices, followed by a cry and a groan. I hurried down the steps, and saw this poor fellow lying on the ground, with a knife sticking between his shoulder-blades, and his murderer,’ he added, pointing to the man who stood quietly by with Constable McNaught’s firm grip upon his shoulder, ‘still stooping over the body of his victim. I was too late, I fear, to save the latter, but just in time to grapple with the assassin⁠—’</p>
			<p>“ ‘It’s a lie!’ here interrupted the man hoarsely. ‘I didn’t do it, constable; I swear I didn’t do it. I saw him fall⁠—I was coming along a couple of hundred yards away, and I tried to see if the poor fellow was dead. I swear I didn’t do it.’</p>
			<p>“ ‘You’ll have to explain that to the inspector presently, my man,’ was Constable McNaught’s quiet comment, and, still vigorously protesting his innocence, the accused allowed himself to be led away, and the body was conveyed to the station, pending fuller identification.</p>
			<p>“The next morning the papers were full of the tragedy; a column and a half of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">York Herald</i> was devoted to an account of Lord Arthur Skelmerton’s plucky capture of the assassin. The latter had continued to declare his innocence, but had remarked, it appears, with grim humour, that he quite saw he was in a tight place, out of which, however, he would find it easy to extricate himself. He had stated to the police that the deceased’s name was Charles Lavender, a well-known bookmaker, which fact was soon verified, for many of the murdered man’s ‘pals’ were still in the city.</p>
			<p>“So far the most pushing of newspaper reporters had been unable to glean further information from the police; no one doubted, however, but that the man in charge, who gave his name as George Higgins, had killed the bookmaker for purposes of robbery. The inquest had been fixed for the Tuesday after the murder.</p>
			<p>“Lord Arthur had been obliged to stay in York a few days, as his evidence would be needed. That fact gave the case, perhaps, a certain amount of interest as far as York and London ‘society’ were concerned. Charles Lavender, moreover, was well known on the turf; but no bombshell exploding beneath the walls of the ancient cathedral city could more have astonished its inhabitants than the news which, at about five in the afternoon on the day of the inquest, spread like wildfire throughout the town. That news was that the inquest had concluded at three o’clock with a verdict of ‘Wilful murder against some person or persons unknown,’ and that two hours later the police had arrested Lord Arthur Skelmerton at his private residence, The Elms, and charged him on a warrant with the murder of Charles Lavender, the bookmaker.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
